ADR: Total conversion functions' conventions (#74)
input-output-hk/cardano-node-wiki: docs/ADR-014-Total-conversion-functions-conventions.md

# Status

- [ ] Proposed 2024-05-21

# Context

## The Problem
In `cardano-api` we have multiple functions performing conversions between one value of the type to the other, for example:

```haskell
toShelleyScriptHash :: ScriptHash -> ScriptHash

> fromShelleyScriptHash :: ScriptHash -> ScriptHash

Reviewer: The argument type and return type are the same?

Reviewer: I think it would be good to some more examples to demonstrate the breadth of applicability.

Reviewer 2: Yep, include some examples so I can better understand what we're looking at.

```

There are multiple naming conventions for the conversion functions which makes them hard to locate.
Some conversion functions with lengthy names, are not very convenient to use.

## Solution Proposal

### Type classes

> For total functions, which are simply converting a value from one type to another, we can use type classes [`Inject`](https://cardano-ledger.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-ledger-core/Cardano-Ledger-BaseTypes.html#t:Inject) & [`Convert`](https://cardano-api.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-api/Cardano-Api-Internal-Eras.html#t:Convert):

Author: Needs explanation why we need `Convert`. (vide @newhoggy)

Reviewer 2: `Convert` is less ambiguous then `Inject` and it was implemented for use with our eon conversions.

```haskell
class Inject t s where

>   inject :: t -> s

Reviewer: Will we be using the type class instance from `cardano-ledger` or defining our own.

Author: I'm for using ledger one, as it is quite trivial, and we would get bunch of instances from ledger out of the box.

class Convert (f :: a -> Type) (g :: a -> Type) where
  convert :: forall a. f a -> g a
```

The use of those conversion functions is limited to **internal use only**.
The library should still export conversion functions with explicit type names for better readability.

### Explicit conversion functions

For explicit conversion functions, the following naming convention should follow:

```haskell
fooToBar :: Foo -> Bar
```

#### Qualified imports
If the module exporting conversion functions is meant to be imported qualified, and provides functions for operating on a single data type, a shorter name with `from` prefix is allowed:

```haskell
module Data.Foo where

fromBar :: Bar -> Foo
```

where the usage would look like:
```haskell
import Data.Foo qualified as Foo

Foo.fromBar bar
```

# Decision

TBD

# Consequences

## Advantages
- An uniform API for total conversions
- A list of `Inject` instances lists all available conversions for the type
- Less maintenance burden with regards to the naming conventions of the conversion functions

## Disadvantages

> - It may be a bit surprising how to discover available conversions, because one would have to browse the type's `Inject` instances to find the conversion functions they are looking for - instead of looking for exported functions.

Reviewer: I would add that the `Inject` instances should be located in the same module as one of the types to avoid orphaned instances if possible.

Author: Added.

# Context

In `cardano-api` we have multiple functions performing conversions between one value of the type to the other, for example:

```haskell
fromShelleyDeltaLovelace :: L.DeltaCoin -> Lovelace -- 'from' at the beginning
lovelaceToQuantity :: Lovelace -> Quantity -- 'to' in the middle
toAlonzoScriptLanguage :: AnyPlutusScriptVersion -> Plutus.Language -- 'to' at the beginning
```

There are multiple naming conventions for the conversion functions which makes them hard to locate.
Some conversion functions with lengthy names, are not very convenient to use.

# Decision

## Type classes

For total functions, which are simply converting a value from one type to another, we can use type classes [`Inject` (from `cardano-ledger`)](https://cardano-ledger.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-ledger-core/Cardano-Ledger-BaseTypes.html#t:Inject) & [`Convert`](https://cardano-api.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-api/Cardano-Api-Internal-Eras.html#t:Convert):
```haskell
class Inject t s where
  inject :: t -> s

class Convert (f :: a -> Type) (g :: a -> Type) where
  convert :: forall a. f a -> g a
```

The use of those conversion functions is limited to **internal use only**.

> The library should still export conversion functions with explicit type names for better readability.

Author: Replaced `is limited` with `should be limited`. Added info about eons.

```

There are multiple naming conventions for the conversion functions which makes them hard to locate.
Some conversion functions with lengthy names, are not very convenient to use.

# Decision

## Type classes

For total functions, which are simply converting a value from one type to another, we can use type classes [`Inject` (from `cardano-ledger`)](https://cardano-ledger.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-ledger-core/Cardano-Ledger-BaseTypes.html#t:Inject) & [`Convert`](https://cardano-api.cardano.intersectmbo.org/cardano-api/Cardano-Api-Internal-Eras.html#t:Convert):
```haskell
class Inject t s where
  inject :: t -> s

class Convert (f :: a -> Type) (g :: a -> Type) where
  convert :: forall a. f a -> g a
```

The use of those conversion functions should be limited to **internal use only**.
The library should still export conversion functions with explicit type names for better readability.
An exception to this would be a set of types which are convertible one to the other, like `Eon`s.
Writing $N \times N$ conversion functions for $N$ types would be cumbersome and using `inject`/`convert` instead is justified here.

> Inject instances should be placed near one of the types definition, to make them more discoverable and avoid orphaned instances.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inject instances should be placed near the definition of one of the types, to make them more discoverable and avoid orphaned instances.
```
I think `types definition` is grammatically incorrect here, it could also be `types' definition`, for example, but it is less clear

>[!NOTE]

> >The difference between `Inject` and `Convert` class is that `Convert` is better typed for types with `Type -> Type` kind.

Reviewer 3: Nice! I was just asking myself this

>In other words, when writing `instance Inject (Foo a) (Bar a)` the GHC's typechecker needs some help to understand the code using `inject`:
>```haskell
>let x = inject @_ @(Bar Bool) $ Foo True
>```
>That is not needed for `convert`.

### Injection law

> The `Inject` and `Convert` classes are meant to be used for trivial conversions only and not for more complex types like polymorphic collections (e.g. `Set a`).

Reviewer 3: What would be the conversion from and to in this example? `Set a` to what, for example? Or do you mean from one `Set` to another?

The `inject` and `convert` implementations should both be injective:
```math
\forall_{x,x' \in X} \ \ inject(x) = inject(x') \implies x = x'
```

This effectively means that any hashing functions or field accessors for constructors losing information (e.g. `foo (Foo _ a) = a`) should not be implemented as `Inject`/`Convert` instances.

## Explicit conversion functions

For explicit conversion functions, the following naming convention should follow:

```haskell
fooToBar :: Foo -> Bar
```

### Qualified imports
If the module exporting conversion functions is meant to be imported qualified, and provides functions for operating on a single data type, a shorter name with `from` prefix is allowed:

```haskell
module Data.Foo where

fromBar :: Bar -> Foo
```

where the usage would look like:
```haskell
import Data.Foo qualified as Foo

> Foo.fromBar bar

Reviewer 3: How about `toBar`? Are we discouraging that? (Just asking, I don't have an opinion)

Author: Good point. I think we should allow `toBar` functions for inverse conversions as well. I'll add that.

```

# Consequences

## Advantages
- An uniform API for total conversions
- A list of `Inject` instances lists all available conversions for the type
- Less maintenance burden with regards to the naming conventions of the conversion functions

## Disadvantages

> - It may be a bit surprising how to discover available conversions, because one would have to browse the type's `Inject` instances to find the conversion functions they are looking for - instead of looking for exported functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It may be a bit less obvious how to discover available conversions, because one would have to browse the type's `Inject` instances to find the conversion functions they are looking for - instead of looking for exported functions.
```
?
